Newsletters: add 173 (2021-11-03) (#678)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _includes/specials/taproot/en/20-activation.md

Less than two weeks after the publication of this post, taproot is
expected to activate at block {{site.trb}}.  We know what we expect to
happen, and we also know about a few possible failure modes.

The best and most likely outcome is that everything goes fine.  Nothing
that happens should be visible to normal users.  Only those carefully
monitoring their nodes or trying to create taproot transactions should
notice anything.  At block 709,631 nearly all full nodes we're aware of
will be enforcing the same consensus rules.  One block later, nodes
running Bitcoin Core 0.21.1, 22.0, or related releases will be enforcing
the additional [taproot][topic taproot] rules not enforced by earlier
software releases.

This carries a risk that earlier and later versions of node software
will accept different blocks.  This happened during the activation of

> the [BIP66][] soft fork in 2015, resulting in a six-block chainsplit and

Reviewer: Do we have a house style for "chainsplit" vs "chain split". We seem to have roughly the same count for both, but "chainsplit" seems a little inconsistent with our preferred "block chain".

several shorter chainsplits.  Significant engineering effort has been
invested in preventing a repeat of that problem, and a similar problem
should only happen with taproot if a miner either deliberately mines a
taproot-invalid block or has disabled safety measures hardcoded into
Bitcoin Core and related node software.

Specifically, to create a chainsplit, a miner would need to create or
accept a transaction that spends from a taproot output (segwit v1
output) without following taproot's rules.  If a miner did that, they
would lose at least 6.25 BTC (about $400,000 USD at time of writing) if
the economic consensus of Bitcoin node operators rejects the
taproot-invalid blocks.

We can't know for sure without creating an invalid block what those node
operators will do---nodes can be run entirely privately---but [proxy
measures][bitnodes] indicate that perhaps more than 50% of node
operators are running taproot-enforcing versions of Bitcoin Core.
That's probably more than sufficient to ensure any miner who creates a

> taproot-invalid block will be fully penalized.

Reviewer: "fully penalized" doesn't feel right to me, since it implies both that a miner may be partially penalized, and that there's someone actively doing the penalizing.

Perhaps something like:

```suggestion
taproot-invalid block will see their block rejected by the network and will not be able to collect their reward for the work they've done.
```

> Still, a temporary chainfork is possible.  It should be possible to

Reviewer: Should we use "chainsplit" (or "chain split") here for consistency?

Reviewer: I think "is possible" is too strong. Can we use a weaker form. Maybe "Still, a temporary chain split is possible (although we believe it to be highly unlikely)."

monitor for it using services such as [ForkMonitor.info][] or using the
`getchaintips` RPC in Bitcoin Core.  If it does happen, lightweight
clients may receive false confirmations.  Although it is theoretically

> possible to get 6 confirmations, like in the 2015 chainfork, that would

Reviewer: As above, should this be:

```suggestion
possible to get 6 confirmations, like in the 2015 chain split, that would
```

imply miners had lost almost $2.5 million in value (compared to losses
of about $50,000 in 2015).  We can hope with values that large at stake,
miners will actually enforce the taproot rules they signaled
preparedness for six months ago.

In almost any failure circumstance we can imagine, a simple but
effective temporary response is to raise your confirmation limit.  If
you normally wait for 6 confirmations before accepting a payment, you
can quickly raise that 30 confirmations for a few hours until the
problem has been resolved or it becomes clear that an even higher

> confirmation limit is required.

Reviewer: Should users only do this if they're accepting segwit v1 spends? Presumably non-taproot spends are unaffected since they'd be valid before and after the soft fork.

Or are you suggesting SPV users don't spend new outputs created after the soft fork, since they may be invalid segwit v1 spends?

Author: Bad confirmations effect everyone to my thinking.  E.g. Mallory creates `tx` and `tx'`.  In the taproot-enforced chain, `tx` is accepted; in the (temporarily longer) non-enforced chain, `tx'` is accepted.  SPV user Alice sees `tx'` get x confirmations and accepts it as a final payment, but eventually there's a reorg and `tx` becomes the accepted transaction.

A version of this is always a risk, of course, but during a chain split, Mallory's chance of pulling this off is much higher, and so it's a case where both Mallory and Alice are each incentivized to pay extra attention to what the nodes around them are accepting, not just their own personal nodes.
